I guess, you know, this is just an arbitrary place to start.
Your father is very definitely a presence in this memoir.
In fact, it almost brackets the tour in Vietnam.
I mean, perhaps you could just explain the decision to claim the book in that manner as an opening.
Or is that just something that happened?
Well, whenever you go into memory for a book, the problem is, at least it is for me, is controlling what you let loose when you open the box of memory.
trying to discern the pattern in those memories that make them significant, that give shape to your life.
And so I'm thinking about getting all this massive material down, as I did when I first started writing this book, trying to see what's going on in all this.
What's the shape of this?
What was I after?
What was going on?
And it began to seem to me that
So much of what I was up to at that time was trying to figure out what it was to be a man.
The natural thing to do is to think of one's father, to measure oneself against one's father, all that kind of thing.
My father hadn't been around much, but I really began to see that I had made
more or less conscious attempts in my life to separate myself from my father, to be a different kind of person than my father, and that this had cost me something.
And I began to feel a very strong pull about the time that the events in this book take place to get to know him better, to connect with him again.
I was kept from doing that.
by a certain fear, I suppose, of falling under his spell, becoming like him, and a certain stiff neckness, a certain pride, a certain kind of moral superiority, perhaps, that I felt that the events of this book kind of knocked out of me, I think.
So at the end of the book, as indeed at the end of his life, we had a
We became rather wonderfully reconciled, I think, and accepted each other in a way that we never really had before.
I see as I'm looking through the book this—I mean, I will refer to myself as he, because it's more natural somehow for me to do that.
I see this— Do you normally do that, by the way?
When I'm talking about myself as I appear in a book, yeah, yeah, because I mean, I was twenty-five, thirty years.
When was it?
The book ends in 1968, which is, uh... How old were you, by the way, at that point?
I was twenty-two.
Okay, that's what I thought.
I mean, you've written two memoirs and you've carried it to the rightful age of twenty-two.
We'll get to that later.
This is the last one.
I never meant to write this one.
Well, we have to talk about this.
But anyway, where was I?
I'm sorry, I interrupted you.
That's okay.
You don't mind that, I hope.
I was asking about referring to yourself.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, okay, when was it?
Twenty-six, twenty-seven years ago.
I mean, the events actually began in the book when I was eighteen, so that was over thirty years ago now.
Thirty-one years ago.
And so the person, though he is me in the sense that I inhabit this body,
feels like a different person to me in a way, which is probably why I'm able to write about him.
I guess what I'm driving at, is he a character for you?
He's a fiction writer, and you've certainly been a character.
Yeah, he is something of a character in the sense that I see around him.
I couldn't write about myself as I am now, as I was yesterday.
I couldn't sit down and write a short story about something that happened, using myself as the main character yesterday.
I don't have that kind
at this close distance.
At the distance of thirty years, I do, I think.
So in a sense, I see this—he comes fairly well-equipped with idiosyncrasies and defining characteristics.
And I suppose, in a way, I'm forced to treat him as a character.
By the very act of putting him in a book, there's no way not to.
But in any case,
I look back through the book, I see this all kind of searching endlessly for a father, I guess.
You know, and the Army, and his commanding officers, and the sergeant who sort of takes care of him.
And physically you care for him at the end of the book.
Oh, yeah.
I think.
I mean, if you're looking for literary things in here, I mean, I think it's very significant that you physically tend to him.
even if it's not for a tremendously long period of time.
But then, by the same token, you know that you're probably not going to see him again.
I mean, you say you were, and you don't.
Yeah, that's right.
I didn't.
He died within two years, I guess.
Yes, he did.
Exactly two years later.
And I promise not to dwell at any length on your brother and your father in this piece, but of course it's germane.
I mean, he was, uh, his love, his love of books was important to me because it caught me when I was, uh,
And I think it's a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very,
Well, when we first got together when I was about fifteen or fifteen, something that we spent with my father in
He had me reading classics, like… It was kind of an education program.
Oh yeah, something of one, yeah, because I had been rather badly educated.
And oddly enough, I actually had read a lot of classics, just on my own.
A lot of Dickens, a lot of Jack Wand, and that kind of thing.
I'd read a lot of Hawthorne.
I liked Hawthorne a lot, without ever realizing that, you know, the weight of the writer, the complications of what I was
But he had me read the Greek tragedies.
He had me read Shakespeare.
He had me read Camus.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, and did you take this as castor royal, or were you in here?
Oh, no, no, no.
No, not at all.
I loved it.
I really did.
And just from time to time over the years when he would come across a book that, uh,
Well, it was just hard to read.
It was just hard to read.
The intellectual vacuity almost.
Yeah, it was.
There was something so definite about it.
The first few months there, I read.
And then, I don't know.
I don't know whether this was.
You know, I think that's just bound to be mistaken.
I think that in a funny way it might have been possible for somebody in World War I, for example, to generalize from his own experience about the experience of others, because they were so similar.
I mean, Robert, the experience of Robert Graves was, I think,
churches in World War I. But everybody in Vietnam had completely different experiences, I discovered, and responded to them in very different ways.
And my own response was that it was deadening.
The experience of it was so deadening that you tended to avoid introspection, you tended to avoid the kinds of
There was a kind of massive act of psychological evasion going on among most of the people I knew, and it certainly included me.
And so that's the kind of rigorous intellectual activity that's implied by serious reading.
I mean, I read Newsweek and Time, and I read a lot of mysteries and that kind of thing.
But I didn't read good books over there.
I have to say, in contrast, I was over there.
Well, you were there for two years.
I was on a ship, so I mean, I was a naval officer on aircraft carrier.
Okay.
So I did.
Which one?
The Ueskine.
Uh-huh.
So you were what, anchored off?
Not anchored.
We did fire-offs every day.
Oh, I see.
You guys were sending, were you sending planes to North Vietnam, or?
Actually, the northern— We don't need this on ship.
Go ahead.
Yeah, the place that I was,
I probably maybe exaggerated how heavenly it really was.
I mean, if I had been living out off the ground, off the ground, you know, the way some guys were.
You had a real bed, right?
Yeah, I had a cot.
But, yeah, I mean, you know, it was a hell of a lot better than the way your average American infantry was.
Well, I remember I flew into Danang once, en route to QB Point, and so we had to spend one at the BOQ,
up there, and we didn't drink all night, but it was like a barracks with a cot.
They had the P.O.Q.
So I guess by comparison to the way people looked at the P.O.Q.
It was, well, yeah, I mean it was a hooch with a couple of cots and, you know, with mattresses, and we had a
Good sound system and a television.
Did you get a Ticom, by the way?
Yeah, I did.
I did.
As a matter of fact, I traded it for something.
I don't remember what, before I left, because I didn't really want it.
It's funny, I didn't want any souvenirs.
I didn't bring anything back.
Now, did you keep notes while you were there?
I wrote letters to my brother.
And that was about it.
I remembered what I needed to remember.
If you look at the book, you'll see this isn't a detailed log.
The book is built around a series of vivid incidents that themselves have stayed with me over the years.
In a funny way, I'm glad I didn't take notes, because it seems to me that what is essential in that experience for me
is exactly what would have stayed with me.
If I'd forgotten it, it wouldn't have been that essential.
Well, I'd have become journalistic at that point, too.
It would change.
You would want to avoid that.
That's right.
And I think I might have overwhelmed the narrative with detail, because all details seemed interesting at the time.
And parsing them out later might have been a problem, whereas
Over the last twenty-five years, my memory has been ordering, without even my participation, my memory has been making a hierarchy of what happened and what was essential to itself, to my idea of what happened, which is what the book really is.
So does this memoir really need thirty years of thought?
I won't pretend I spent thirty years thinking about this.
I didn't.
What it maybe needed was thirty years' distance, twenty-five years' distance, for me to be able to summon up the camaraderie to admit what I did and to take responsibility for the kind of things that I and other people did over there.
things that happened to us, things that we did to other people.
In that sense, the twenty-five years must have been necessary, because I certainly wasn't willing to do it before.
Do you consider Vietnam the event of your generation?
Yes, I do.
And for better or worse, are you—I guess I'll have to come up with a better verb, but I mean, pleased.
I don't know.
I don't know about that.
I like to think that on one level, in one sense, I wouldn't have missed it for the world.
And then I have to back around fast and say, this presumes that I didn't get killed, that I didn't get seriously wounded, you know.
That's why I didn't go to Pensacola to become a pilot, because I'd love to fly.
Sure.
Three thousand other guys wouldn't have missed it either.
You know, they felt a lot of good at doing them.
And there got a lot of guys running around without legs and arms and
all their brains.
So, you know, to talk about the war simply as a kind of bank of experience on which a future writer might draw, which is, I have to admit, the kind of idea I had of it when I was young, of war.
I just didn't have the imagination.
Prior to going to Vietnam?
Yeah, I think it started to hit me when my friends started getting killed over there.
Well, you were pretty gung-ho during training.
Yeah, I was.
Oh, I was very gung-ho.
I was a very, as they say, strapped troop when I was first.
When I read the chapter, you were talking about the skipper, you know, talking about himself.
Oh, yeah, I was a really gung-ho soldier.
In fact, you know, at a certain point when I was first in and doing airborne training and all that stuff, I even thought,
Well, this wouldn't be a bad life, you know.
Okay.
Yeah.
I never gave that a thought.
Yeah, I did.
It was a fleeting thought.
Because, you know, I knew I wanted to be a writer, and I knew that these things, I mean, at bottom, they offered me duty in London.
I mean, nice duty.
Yeah.
But I had to extend two and a half years.
No way.
Well, it did last long.
I mean, once I, once I,
And, uh, you know, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh, there's a lot of, uh,
of physical challenges that I was overcoming, and for once in years actually being successful in something.
When I joined the Army I had nothing but a record of failure behind me, basically, and here was something that I found myself doing well at.
Which is how so many really great soldiers come to the service.
That's true.
It's almost like a foreign legion.
Can you give us that image briefly?
nowhere else to go.
That's true.
It really was.
And in your particular case, I mean, school was washing out, and so what am I going to do now?
Yeah.
I was really at a loss when I went in.
See, you never could have gotten into Navy OCS.
I mean, the fact that you didn't have a college degree.
Right.
That's right.
The Navy's very different in that.
Half the guys in my section had master's degrees.
I mean, it was like a
It was safe.
I said, I'm not going to deny that one.
One of those PBRs.
Well, yeah, that could have happened.
I was a line officer, and though I had background in journalism, worked for a couple of papers, there were no guarantees.
47 guys died in the Eryskine fire.
Is that right?
And four of whom happened to have been journalists.
And, I mean, I used to, every day, live with the realization that two bodies were floating under, you know, where I had my desk.
Don't you remember the Eryskine fire?
Yes.
You were over there, I guess.
That was 67.
Yep.
And that happened.
How did that come about?
Stupidity.
Maybe that's something you can say.
Again, we're talking about this close friend of yours who had that death.
Well, I don't know.
I don't know.
I mean, did you feel like you were kind of imposing on him, in a way?
I don't think I was going to fit in, but I'm just curious.
Yeah.
Let's talk—I mean, you've written two memoirs now, and they carry you through
at the age of 22.
This is it.
I'm at the end of this.
Tim O'Brien told me he's all done writing, too, and I'll believe it when I see it.
He's all done writing?
That's what he said.
Well, I'm not saying that.
I understand that, but what I'm saying—he said this is it, but you're saying this is it for memoir.
No, I understand precisely what you're saying.
Anyway, Tim— What I'm doing is being— I don't believe Tim.
Neither do I.
He may have stopped for a while.
He's got personal problems right now.
I knew this is a new future now.
I think that, you know, you're... You don't mind this kind of a dismissive... No, if you can make sense of the later... I do.
Okay.
I like it.
No, I think your interview with...
Tim O'Brien, in which he talks about rewriting Cacciano several years later.
And also the things that Carrie's doing again, too.
Oh, I wish you wouldn't see.
I respect his motives.
I don't have any problem with his motives in doing that, but I think that it's a mistake, and I'll tell you why.
I think that, I mean, the famous example of a compulsive rewriter is Wordsworth, who goes back to the works of his youth and his old age.
in his actually late middle years, through his old age, and he just destroyed them.
He went back.
Yeah, we have the earlier versions, and they're superior.
He didn't destroy them in the sense that we still have the earlier versions.
The thing you've got to remember is, I think, as a writer, that you are not the person you were when you wrote that book.
That's precisely the words that Bill Kennedy used.
That's exactly what she just said.
And you have to respect that person.
I think that you're second-guessing.
You're imposing—I mean, it would be—it makes no more sense for me to go back now and rewrite something I wrote ten years ago than it would be for me to rewrite the work of a friend, because I have no more authority, moral authority, over that work now, I think, than I went over a friend's work.
Whoever wrote that stuff had his own atmosphere of creation that he was inhabiting at the time, things that might not be really apparent to me right now, yet that a reader may very well discern.
I may have lost the bond with that work, but it exists on its own terms.
And to continually reimpose new terms on a work like that is –
is unfair to both the work and the writer that you were when you wrote it.
The very act of writing, the thing in the first place, has changed you and made you into a different person.
I am a different person now, not just for the life I've lived, but for the work I've done.
When I really am working at the top of my form, I am aware that I am seeing things differently, that there's an excitement that comes from
I can think of no other word than revelation, that things are becoming clear to me that were not clear to me before, and that, for a human being, is change.
When you see something clearly that you haven't seen before, it changes you.
And you're not that person anymore.
You can't go back.
You can't walk backwards.
See, this is relevant to the memoir, by the way, in a way.
Yeah.
I mean, in a way.
Sure.
In a reverse kind of way.
Right.
Had you tried to write this 20 years ago, it certainly would not be the book.
No, it would not.
If I wrote this book right now, if I wrote In Pharaoh's Army right now, it would be a different book than what I've written.
Because I've, I mean, I just, there's no way I could tell that story that way again.
That story not only belongs to the time in which it is set, but it also belongs to the time in which it was written.
That's a great quote.
I can't see where I'm going to use it.
Go ahead.
And the person who wrote it doesn't exist anymore, because that book changed him.
There's probably an essay here for me.
I mean, you know, you talk about Leaves of Grass.
I mean, he was a doctor.
That's a doctor.
Absolutely.
I mean, his whole life's mission was he did nine different rites.
And of course then in the deathbed, the ninth one, is the one who has this supersedes and replaces all earlier versions.
Henry James, when he was writing the prefaces, went in and fooled around a little bit with some of those things.
To what degree, I can't say.
I haven't read James Reader.
But it is a very interesting, and maybe there's an essay there.
Yeah.
Now that's funny.
With the prefaces, that's different.
He also did go ahead and tinkle a little bit.
If you have the New York edition, which I have, which I have a collector, I can tell, can appreciate.
That's, you know, it really makes sense also to have, if you can get the first edition of the books, because they are basically very infinite in many respects.
He did.
While he was considering them and writing the prefaces, he did.
He couldn't help himself.
He went in and tinkered, you know.
Well, Frank O'Connor would do that, too.
I mean, you know, the great Irish short story, right?
If you look at the ending, let's say,
that story of his Guests of the Nation, in which the IRA, if you remember, shoot a couple of British soldiers that they've been holding hostage because some of their men are hung in Dublin.
He changed the ending in different ways, tinkered with the wording, especially the last line, a few other things, and couldn't leave it alone, kept going back to it.
You might say that he improved it, I don't know.
I just think that, I think it's a mistake.
But my thinking is obviously, I mean, I'm seeing the problem from my own lens, basically, and what, I respect Tim's
You know how we get off on this, Tim and I get off on this, is that the P.W.
Review was based on the first they sent out, you know, one of these fancy advanced readers copies.
He's done two more since then.
Two more?
Two more.
three different versions of the novel in advance of publication.
And it's probably going to be changed.
Mark, he's probably going to be doing this right up until the time they must launch it.
When is it coming out?
It's October.
It's probably right around the same time as your book.
I liked it, by the way.
What is it called?
It's called In the Lake of the Woods.
In the Lake of the Woods, that's right.
He uses a couple of devices.
It's about a Minnesota politician, right?
Yeah, but it's Vietnam.
Yeah, he's formed there.
And the reason I bring Tim in is there is a purpose.
When I asked you about the event of your life and you're going there, I asked him if he had it to do over again.
He said, I was a coward foregoing.
I thought about not going.
I never should have gone.
He considers himself a coward foregoing.
I mean, did you ever harbor any thoughts about not going?
I mean, there was never any other thoughts?
I know you discussed that scene in the San Francisco bar with your friend's father, where the guy is basically pleading for the two guys, don't go.
I mean, I think that's essentially what he's saying.
Yeah, that's right.
I know exactly what Tim means, and I would have to say that something like that is true of me.
It's a little different form.
I think that from what I've read in Tim's work, say in the book, The Things They Carried, I know that that is fiction and that I'm not to understand that as a direct transcription of what happened to him.
And he says that's the case, by the way.
I know, I know, and he's right to say so.
However, I do think that from that and other things I've read, my impression is that Tim had a certain outlook on the war before he went, that he had a certain sense that the war was morally indefensible, basically.
I think he had a take on that before he went.
I think so.
I did not.
That is pertinent, I think.
Cowardice is too strong a word, I think, really.
The form that my evasion took was that I simply did not interest myself too much in things that would lead me to that kind of a conclusion, because I knew in advance that I was going.
I couldn't imagine an alternative to going.
I mean, to me, first of all, to go to prison,
to go to, I mean, that was, you've got to remember, my own man spent time in prison.
That was, to me, the most shameful thing that could happen to anybody.
I don't care, you know, now I have a sense in which I'm a different person now.
When I see, you know, when I see Philip Berrigan going back to prison yet again, as he did in North Carolina, I mean, I think, what heroism, you know, what incredible heroism.
I don't necessarily agree with all his positions on everything, but
But I just think, I know he hates it.
He just hates being in prison.
It's very hard on him.
If you read Francine de Pussick's grave's book, Civil Disobedience, which was published about 20 years ago, she's already talking about Berrigan and assault Berrigan and how hard prison is on him.
And here he is.
He's been back 10 times since.
And it is just very, very hard on him.
So there are ways, obviously, of approaching this experience.
For one person, it's an act of heroism.
For another, it's an act of cowardice.
It depends on the moral equipment, I guess, that you bring to it.
But for me, it was an unimaginable thing to go to prison or to go to Canada.
I couldn't imagine it.
I simply couldn't imagine it.
And I mean, I belonged, for better or for worse, to a community of people.
My community at the time was a community of soldiers, and it was just unthinkable among the soldiers I knew to do this.
You were younger, too.
I was younger, absolutely.
You were there before me, and I'm older than you are.
I went to OCS after graduate school, and I had things figured out.
You didn't have things figured out.
I mean, I'd get pretty close to being uncomfortable about it, and then I'd back off, you know.
I'd back off.
I'd kind of just shut down a little bit.
I was curious enough, finally, when I found myself for that year that I was in Washington, talking to people who really knew a lot about it.
You know, like I met I.F.
Stone.
I'm surprised by my favorite.
Well, I was already in the service.
I was already in the service.
That's the thing, see.
And he certainly made me aware that there were questions to be asked about my condition.
And he asked him, and he was very, very, you know, he recognized he had a baby on his hands, and he did not tear me apart.
I mean, but he just asked me questions that I knew.
that he knew I couldn't answer, and in a way that I needed to answer to make this thing a crusade that is the only justification for being in a war like that.
So he really made me very uncomfortable, and sort of this fantastic professor whose classes I went to sometimes at Georgetown, out of interest.
a professor at Georgetown.
And the books I was reading, you know, Lucien Bedard and especially Bernard Fall and Graham Greene, I mean, this wasn't quite as simple a deal as the Army had made it out to be, you know.
And as our president, you know, I was – the people I grew up with in Washington State, very blue-collar, working-class people,
And the guys my mom went out with, they're all veterans.
They'd all fought in World War II.
They took, you know, you never heard anything, any criticism about the House on American Activities Commission from those people.
In fact, you know, when the newsreels, when we'd go to movie theaters and the newsreels would show that, you know, the U.S.
Marshals hosing down the steps of the Congress, you know,
Everybody would cheer, and I would too, because it was really a very dualistic world that I grew up in.
And the idea of doubting the president?
I mean, who are you to doubt your president?
How much do you know that you can doubt your president and your government?
And that is one of the ways in which Vietnam was to signal an event, is that it turned a nation of believers into a nation of cynics.
after 10 years, 12 years of being systematically lied to, and your first instinct now is to distrust always and to question the motives.
It isn't necessarily true anymore that you think they know better.
Let's talk a bit—again, let's go back to the memoir here—and you say this is it.
Oh, absolutely, this is it.
I don't have much of interest to report.
Well, I mean, a question I have here is, have you lived an eventful life?
Obviously, prior to the age of 22 you have, and I'm not— I lived—let me put it this way.
Eventful in terms of worth writing a memoir?
No.
No, I think not.
I think that in the most—in the profoundest sense, it has been an eventful life since then.
And probably the most meaningful they were, too.
Yes.
Oh, yeah.
The things that the rest of my life are made out of and have happened since then.
This could be a key quote, though, so we'll play with this for a while.
Yeah.
Because maybe there is a dichotomy in your life that you've covered in the two memoirs and the more satisfying events that may have come afterwards.
I think what the two books in a different way show is someone who's unformed.
trying to find a form, trying to find a place in the world, trying to find some idea of who he is, how he fits in, what he's supposed to do, and is propelled by those questions on a field of action.
He moves a lot.
He's doing things.
They're active, and the things that happen to him are consequential and even dangerous.
The story since then has to do with coming to terms with those questions, finding the answers to them, and accepting the answers once they begin to come to him.
And those are inwardly exciting times.
They don't necessarily lend themselves to the same excitement and narrative treatment that these earlier memoirs do.
And the person is at hazard in different ways.
I mean, I haven't been physically at hazard in a year since.
In a sense, I've had the more serious problems that everyone faces of somehow bringing home the bacon and making a life for a family.
learning to stay put after a lifetime of wandering, learning to be with one person when I've obviously not been used to that, and working out the problems of a marriage and being a father.
Those are the really tough problems.
And I do write about them, but I tend to write about them
They tend to find their way more into my short stories than in memoir form.
This, in Pharaoh's army, could not have legally been called this man's life.
No.
He's still, yeah, he's still something less than a man, something more than a boy.
He's caught in some ghostly half-country there, some no-man's land of...
of life, which is what the Army does.
It postpones it.
You talk about going to the Army and becoming a man, but it really defers that tremendously, because the thing that makes you a man is assuming responsibility for your own life, and the Army really does take care of all that for you.
I mean, all the things that make life very difficult for people on the outside are taken care of on the inside.
You never go hungry.
That's right.
You'll always have a roof over your head.
Someone will always be telling you what you should do, when you should do it, what you should wear.
They'll get your laundry done for you.
They'll get your shopping done for you.
You don't have to worry about it.
It's a really cushy life, actually.
They like to make it sound like it's a sacrifice and a really tough life, but the truth is the military life is extremely cushy.
You certainly have a chance of getting your ass cut.
That's the downside.
But again, think how many of the people in the service actually are at risk.
Oh, yeah.
Very few, really.
I mean, half a million people at any given time over there.
The odds of people getting killed, never mind even getting killed, seeing action was, you know, remote.
Yeah, it was.
And then they'd be the same people over and over and over and over and over again.
I'd like to say that your Swarthines are good.
I recall, again, through the prism of memory, I recall the salient detail.
I really do read this.
This is also the event of my lifetime, too, so I was very pleased that my man would still have a lot to do here.
Is there a seamlessness between the two memoirs in your mind?
No, oddly enough, you know, it's funny that when my brother read the book, this last one, he said, he said, it really feels like a different book than the last one, you know?
He said, you know, he was surprised by how little like the last one it felt to him.
I don't know whether other readers will respond that way, but
I think that's probably true.
I don't think there's a seamlessness.
I was really a pretty different person in this book, just on the superficial level of... You didn't intend it to be a bookend, let's put it that way.
No, no, no, no.
It's not a sequel, no.
I didn't think of it as a sequel, obviously.
There's no way to avoid anybody else seeing it that way.
But, no, I saw it as very much a kind of independent book about...
What happens to somebody under these circumstances?
The kind of moral transformations that take place with lasting effects when somebody finds himself in this situation, when somebody is sent to war.
What happens?
Actually, we're having a hard ground here.
You apparently tried Matthew Falls, Stardustead writing, but it was a writer of your life, I hope.
You know, you fooled around with it prior to going overseas, and then I guess you made some half-hearted attempts while you were there.
Tell me a little bit about that, and then I guess also
When you discovered that you could be a writer and that you were a writer, again, this is what Pete Everett did.
Sure, we do want to get into the evolution of the writer, I guess.
Sure.
Well, that's fine.
I'm happy to talk about that.
By the time I was 16, I knew I wanted to be a writer.
How did you know this?
Partly, it was a process of elimination in that I wasn't good at anything else at all.
And, you know, of course, I was very gratified to have my brother encourage me before I went off to this boarding school.
But I was also well aware that he was my brother and that one's family is perhaps more apt to encourage you than— What's the age difference, once again, between Jeffrey?
Seven and a half years.
And he just graduated.
But when I got off to school, I had a very bumpy start, even in my English class.
But I had a teacher there who really, really fired me up.
I keep going, just making sure I'm not missing anything.
I was just in love with literature.
and with language, but not in a promiscuous way.
I mean, he didn't love every word he ever met.
He was very, very—how can I put it?
He was very Senecan in his practical language.
He was the right words in the right place, you know, and not a word more.
And every comma mattered to him.
So when I first got there, I'd get my papers back.
Well, they didn't have shredders, but they looked like blood had been poured on them.
There was so much red ink on them.
They looked murdered.
And it was a little disheartening at first, but I just somehow knew that this was where, you know, I could take the hit in biology and algebra and all that.
Though I did badly in those subjects, I thought, this isn't going to be my life.
But boy, when I got those things back, I thought,
I got to get this right.
I paid attention to him, and I'd go through my essays, and I'd rewrite them.
And I learned so much from him about what is essential and exact in language, and just the most obvious things, like avoiding the irresponsible passive voice, the mistake
you know, the political voice.
He was big on Orwell.
He had me read Orwell's essays on language.
And he was just an extraordinary influence and an encouragement, because when I did something right, he'd lead me along.
And after a year with him, I was just on a course, really.
And he'd invite me over and talk to some folks.
And so the love I already had when I arrived there was just exponentially increased, and also a sense of confidence, finally, because it gave me a sense of control over language that I'd never had before.
And I did well in my next year there.
I felt almost everything else except history, and they acted up and all the stuff that they had to let go of me, for which I do not blame them.
But, you know, I was...
I was already someone with an ambition to be a writer by the time I left, and I couldn't really imagine being anything else.
A fiction writer, I mean.
Yeah, a fiction writer.
I wanted to be a novelist and a poet.
I wrote a lot of poetry.
Did you publish any of poetry?
Just in school literary magazines.
In school literary magazines.
No, no, no.
I mean, I was, what, 18 when I left, I guess.
But I wrote even when I was in the Army.
I kept writing when there were lulls in the training, when I'd be in garrison, that kind of thing.
I tried to write, usually poetry.
And then the year that I was in Washington in language school, I really sat down and tried to write a novel.
And I got along pretty well in it.
I mean, it probably wasn't very good.
There's no trace of it left now.
I burned it.
Really?
Oh, yeah, I actually burned it.
Oh, yeah, I physically destroyed it.
Why?
Because I hated it.
I hated it.
I came to hate it.
You don't want anybody reading it 50 years from now.
I can't.
It doesn't exist.
I mean, but... I just hated it as an object.
I burned it when I was in Vietnam, as a matter of fact.
I just poured a bunch of gasoline on it one day and burned it, absolutely.
Where is this?
Where was it from now?
It was in that little place I talk about.
Were you tricking that knife or what?
I don't remember what led me to do it, but it was just sitting there.
I wasn't working on it.
It became a very reproachful present, but I hated it.
I really couldn't stand reading it.
Frustration, partly.
Were you losing the touch?
Yeah, yeah.
I maybe thought I'd never be able to do it again.
I don't remember what my frame of mind was, but mostly I remember it was just basically detestation.
But when I got back… Tell me physically and what you did.
You burned it?
Yeah.
Poured gasoline on it and burned it.
Outside?
Outside.
In a trash heap.
We used to burn our trash out back.
I just took it out there.
Did you tell anybody what you were doing or just doing it?
Yeah, I just did it.
I mean, you know.
It wasn't of interest to the guy I was serving with.
Have you been in touch with him, by the way?
No.
He seems like a first-class guy.
He was a great guy.
The kind of guy you'd like to know what he's been up to or how he's doing.
No idea what he would.
No.
Is that his actual name or did you change names?
Changed names.
And the friend that was killed, was that his actual name?
No.
You did change names.
Oh, you bet I did.
I've changed almost everybody's name but my own, my family's.
There's no reason for
just off the record for a moment here, in his particular case, I would have used, he was killed 28 years ago.
They might not appreciate hearing that, you know, at this forget the child, I mean, that, you know, he was running around getting drunk and screwing girls in town and all that.
They probably know it.
at some level, but they don't need to hear that now.
To have it documented in what would probably be the only time that the son is going to get his name in today.
Kind of an archival document.
Right.
I mean, he was just a great guy, but he was a kid like me.
Well, we had a wonderful time together, and we really did.
He was a wonderful guy.
But, no, I didn't see any point at all, and there was no reason to use his name, just as there was no reason to use the name of my ex-fiancé, for example.
It could only cause pain for her.
She's married now.
She doesn't need to know.
Apparently, she's resolved her psychological emotional problem.
No, I don't think she has.
Well, here's a piece of work for you.
I mean, not for the record, but I mean.
It was something.
I think she still is.
I know people who know her.
We don't have to get into that.
Yeah.
She's pretty young.
Again, I want to get back to the writing.
So you destroyed it.
You burned.
I mean, this was a symbolic act as much as anything else.
Yeah.
But it was, I mean.
Committing to the flames is something quite final about that.
Yeah.
I really did hate the book by the time I did that.
And you didn't really seem to tell us what it was about, I guess.
I thought that was kind of beside the point, really.
I mean, there would have been a digression there that I didn't really think was necessary.
Then I started another novel, and when I got back, I mean, I knew, I still knew, even though, you know, that I'd had a hard time writing or even reading while I was in Vietnam, I still knew that was what I wanted to do with my life.
And it was very hard to get started again.
It was really, really hard.
But as I describe at the end of the book, I managed to carve a place out for myself at the place I was living, and at a time in the day, and I'd go and write.
And I could tell at the end of the day, reading all of this stuff, that it wasn't that great, but I also knew that I needed to do it in order to ever write well, that I needed to get through there.
Yeah, you were trying to write a novel?
Yeah, yeah.
I was trying to write a novel.
I was trying to write it all about Vietnam and using the events.
But I couldn't.
It was just too costly.
You're at Oxford now?
No.
Well, yeah.
Partly while I was at Oxford.
And partly when I first got back when I was living with my fiancee in Maryland.
But when I got to Oxford, I continued to write.
I'd write, you know,
The studies there were very demanding and absorbing, but I managed to write at least two and a half or three hours every day.
I wrote fiction.
Yeah, I wrote a couple of novels during the years that I was there.
They weren't very good.
What were the years, basically?
68 to 72.
They weren't very good, but I kept writing.
I got a job briefly at the Washington Post when I got it back in 1972.
Reporter?
Yeah, general assignment reporter.
City?
City beat.
Yeah, mostly police beat, City Hall, real low-level stuff.
You could have been in that Watergate thing.
Oh, yeah.
In fact, Carl Bernstein's a friend of mine.
I mean, the luck of the draw.
Luck of the draw, absolutely.
It could have been you over there.
It's a good thing it wasn't, because I was such a lousy reporter.
that Nixon would probably still be president.
Never would have broken the story.
Never would have broken it?
No.
I found it hard to ask people really searching questions.
I'd get shy about it.
You have to.
My wife gets mad at me sometimes because when I'm working, I'll ask anything if it's relevant.
Better not to answer, right?
I never hold it against a person who doesn't want to talk to a writer.
John Updike has never accepted one of my invitations to be interviewed, and he doesn't give many.
And that's cool.
I thoroughly respect that.
I don't think I've ever read an interview with him.
He's done a couple, you know, and it's what it's mattered.
I mean, it's Time Magazine.
He did something with the BBC once, which was good.
And then Tyler has never given any so far as I know.
Is that right?
Interesting.
But even when you're working as a journalist and you're asking questions, I mean, there's nothing that's written that you have to talk to a writer, a reporter.
Don't.
Just don't.
But the question sometimes has to be asked, as long as it's relevant.
I'm going to turn this on to my side.